# FilmPerformanceAnalyticsAndPrediction
This project analyzes movie data to find out what makes some movies do better than others at the box office. We looked at different things like how much money was spent on making the movie, the movie's genre, when it was released, and how much money it made. By comparing these factors, we tried to see if there are any patterns that can predict if a movie will be successful. 
After all this analysis, we also built a machine learning model that tries to guess how well a particular director's next movie would perform, if we know details like its budget, genre, production house, etc. 

This repo contains all the analysis and code used for this project.


# Overview of dataset 
The dataset focuses on historical performance criteria, such as ratings and financial success, for different directors. The dataset includes information about directors, movie budgets, genres, release dates, box office earnings, and ratings. Statistical and data analysis techniques were applied to draw meaningful insights and answers to these questions.

The project intends to answer a number of important concerns about the film business and the impact of many factors on a director's film productions. The findings from this research can provide valuable insights for the film industry, guiding decision-makers in choosing directors, genres, release dates, and budget allocation strategies to maximize the success of future movie projects, both in the US and worldwide. 

### Features Collected: 
- Director Names
- Movies made by Director
- Movie Names
- Genre(s)
- Date of Release 
- Rating Value
- Rating Count
- Runtime
- Year of Release
- MPAA rating (e.g. PG, R)
- Box Office
- Budget

### Features inferred: 
- Financial Success (using budget and box office)
- Popularity Success (using rating and no. of ratings)


# Research Questions

- Does the number of ratings impact the movie's rating score?
- What are the key factors influencing a movie's success, both in terms of popularity and financial performance?
- How has the performance of movies changed over time?
- Can a director's future success be predicted based on past performance?
- How does a director's filmography evolve in terms of ratings and financial returns over time?
- What role does budget play in a film's box office and critical success?
- How does genre preference influence a director's success?

# Key Insights Obtained

- Movies with higher ratings tend to have a higher box office performance.
- The success score, considering both popularity and financial aspects, provides a metric of a movie's overall success.
- Certain genres may be more popular among audiences for specific directors, impacting both ratings and box office earnings.
- A higher movie budget might not always correlate to a higher box office.
- A specific director’s movies might perform better financially in certain months.
- Correlation heatmap varies greatly from director to director.
- For certain directors, while movie rating might not affect financial success, the count of ratings has a positive correlation with box office.

Note: These insights are visualized in the [Medium post](https://medium.com/@abdulahadbukhari911/unveiling-the-directors-vision-a-deep-dive-into-movie-data-analytics-9cb140f5e6b4) and also in "Main_Notebook_G18.ipynb". 

# Overview of files: 

### create_dataframe.ipynb
This file contains code to create the dataset we used for analysis. This takes in a list of directors from the "top_250_directors.csv" file, and then uses the PyMovieDb API to get information on all the movies of these directors, and creates and saves a dataset in the file "raw_data.csv". 

### Main_Notebook_G18.ipynb
This is the main notebook of the project. All the pre-processing of data, and then analysis of the movies and their metrics is performed here, along with digestible visualizations to display interesting findings (using seaborn and matplotlib). In the latter half of the notebook is the section where we train our machine learning model, and then evaluate its performance.  

### Performance Metrics (ML Model) - G18.docx
This file contains evaluation metrics of our machine learning model and some analysis on its subpar performance. The model was tuned many times with various techniques, such as different normalizations, different one-hot encordings, manual feature selection, etc., and this document follows along our attempts and their results. It concludes with some thoughts on why the model did not perform very well (TLDR: likely not enough movies per director and too many directors).  

### raw_data.csv
Contains our entire dataset for analysis and evaluation. This file is generated by "create_dataframe.ipynb" and used by "Main_Notebook_G18.ipynb". 

### top_250_directors.csv
A list of the top 250 directors based on IMDb ratings. This list is used by "create_dataframe.ipynb" when creating our dataset. 

### blogpost_links.txt
This text file contains links to Medium blogposts we made for our project. Feel free to read the second (updated) one to get a summary of our project! 


# My Contributions
This was a group project, and my contributions were as follows: 
-Defined the initial scope of the project after coming up with the idea, and helped brainstorm and define our primary research questions
-Trained the machine learning model (in "Main_Notebook_G18.ipynb")
-Repeatedly tuned the ML model and evaluated it (details in "Performance Metrics (ML Model) - G18.docx")
-Helped create the dataframe after analzying many different scraping options and APIs we could use, and writing part of the code for the TMDb API we eventually used
-Helped decide what analysis to do for our EDA and for the main analysis
-Came up with formulas for success_financial and success_popularity (descriptions in the main notebook) to make target variables for the ML model and wholistically quantify a movie's success

